Understanding AI Risks in Transportation
AI Assurance for Transportation Whitepaper Series

September 2024

This whitepaper was developed in collaboration with the NASA System-Wide Safety Project

Table of Contents

I.

Introduction

II.  Use of AI in Transportation

a.	 Different	Contexts	of	Potential	AI	Usage

b.	 AI	Use	Cases

c.	 AI-Enabled	Operational	Concepts

III.  Basic	Risk	Management	Concepts	for	AI

a.	 Perspectives	on	Addressing	Risk

b.  AI Risk Management

IV.  AI	Risk	Identification

a.	 Preparation	for	Risk	Identification

b.	 Hazard	Identification

V.  AI Risk Assessment

VI.  Mitigating	AI	Risks

a.	 System-Level	Risk	Mitigation

b.	 Component	Risk	Mitigation

c.	 Risk	Management	Strategy

VII. Human	Considerations	in	AI	Risks

a.  Human Actors in AI-Enabled Systems

b.  Scope of Human-AI Interactions

c.	 Risk	Considerations

VIII.  Perspective

IX.  AI	Risk-Related	Research	at	HASS	COE	and	NASA	SWS

X.  Contact

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

3

5

5

6

7

9

9

10

12

12

13

15

17

17

19

19

21

21

22

23

25

26

26

2

Introduction

Our	first	AI	Assurance	(AIA)	whitepaper,	An Overview of AI Assurance for Transportation╣,		was
published	in	April	2024.	One	of	the	identified	key	areas	for	AIA	research	is	AI risk assessment
and mitigation,	which	has	not	been	explored	sufficiently	in	the	past.	To	promote	and	accelerate
research	efforts	to	address	AI	risks,	this	whitepaperùas	the	second	in	the	seriesùprovides
fundamental	information	about	AI	risks	and	their	associated	techniques	in	the	context	of	Highly
Automated	Transportation	Systems	(HATS).

The	U.S.	DOT	Highly	Automated	Systems	Safety	Center
of	Excellence	(HASS	COE)	has	defined	HATS	as	a	type
of transportation system that ômakes use of automation
to achieve its goalsùsafety, efficiency, speed, or other
benefitsùin ways that are beyond the understanding,
predictability, or possibly even intervention of highly
trained operators▓.ö	Examples	of	HATS	include	automated
vehicles	such	as	self-driving	cars	and	unmanned	aerial
vehicles,	as	well	as	enabling	infrastructure	such	as
intelligent	traffic	management	systems	and	unmanned
traffic	management.	In	the	context	of	HATS,	AI	can
support	automated	vehicle	functions	such	as	perception,
localization,	mapping,	planning,	and	control	as	well	as
intelligent	traffic	management	functions	such	as	traffic
detection, data analysis, and prediction.

AI-Related Terms Used in this
Whitepaper:

ò AI function: A mathematical
function	that	AI	provides	to	achieve	a
certain	task,	such	as	classification	or
regression.

ò AI component:	A	software	or
hardware	component	that	implements
an	AI	function,	which	is	part	of	a	system.

ò AI-enabled system: A	system	with
AI	components	or	other	software	or
hardware	components,	such	as	sensors
or	actuators,	to	achieve	complex	tasks
or	missions	in	operations.	Examples
include	vehicles	with	automated	driving
systems and AI-enabled intelligent
traffic	management	systems.

Despite	the	demonstrated	capabilities	of	AI/ML	technology,	very	limited	studies	have	been
performed to identify, assess, and mitigate the unique risk these technologies may pose to
transportation systems. This risk, referred to as AI risk	in	this	whitepaper,	is	a	category	of
operational risk introduced because of the integration, deployment, and operations of AI-enabled
systems in the transportation eco-system. AI risks may cause a range of potential hazards to
vehicles,	drivers/passengers,	pedestrians,	and	other	stakeholders	in	the	transportation	ecosystem,
which	in	turn	may	affect	a	number	of	transportation	considerations,	including	safety,	performance,
security,	privacy,	reliability,	and	resilience.	For	example,	safety	hazards	related	to	AI	may	include
misdetection	of	pedestrians	and	other	vehicles,	incorrect	vehicle	localization,	and	imprecise
identification	of	lanes,	which	could	lead	to	harms such as crashing, staying on an incorrect path,
driving	in	the	wrong	lanes,	or	blocking	traffic.

1					H.	Yu,	T.	Lochrane,	T.	Pham,	S.	Mandalapu,	G.	Romanski,	and	D.	Bakar,	An	Overview	of	AI	Assurance	for	Transportation,	U.S.
							DOT	HASS	Whitepaper,	April	2024.

2					https://www.transportation.gov/hasscoe/what-we-offer

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

3

To	better	address	these	challenges,	AI-related	hazards	should	first	be	identified,	assessed,	and
mitigated	systematically	before	they	pose	significant	risks	to	streets,	highways,	or	the	national
airspace. To this end, AI risk identification, assessment, and mitigation (RIAM) is an important
part of HATS safety assurance. AI RIAM focuses primarily on implementing safety technologies,
processes,	and	practices	to	address	AI	risks	in	the	development,	deployment,	and	operations	of
AI-enabled systems.

Both qualitative and quantitative approaches may be used to identify and assess AI risks, based
on	operational	experience	and	lessons	learned,	as	well	as	real-world,	simulation,	or	external	data.
Risk mitigation is subsequently performed to reduce the opportunities for these risks to arise and
lessen their impact on the transportation system. AI RIAM is critical for the safety assurance, either
voluntary	or	mandated	certification, and safe operation of AI-enabled systems across modes, from
aviation	to	surface	transportation.

Diverse	perspectives	exist	concerning	the	application	of	AI	RIAMùfrom	safety	and	security,	to
reliability	and	resilience,	among	othersùand	there	are	a	variety	of	standards	for	risk	mitigation
that	apply	to	different	areas	of	the	transportation	industry.	While	it	is	important	for	practitioners
to	understand	the	details	of	these	standards	and	techniques,	the	goal	of	this	whitepaper	is	to
provide	an	overview	of	the	basics	of	AI	RIAM	that	may	be	applied	across	transportation	domains.
As	such,	this	whitepaper	is	considered	a	starting	point	when	it	comes	to	understanding	the	basics
of	AI	RIAM,	rather	than	a	reference	on	specific	practices	to	perform	in	a	particular	industry	or
application.

To better understand the risks that AI components pose across the transportation system, it is
important	to	first	understand	how	they	may	be	used	in	the	overall	transportation	system.	The	next
section	describes	these	uses	and	how	different	AI	use	cases	in	transportation	may	translate	into
different	types	of	AI	risks.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

4

Use of AI in Transportation

Across	the	transportation	sector,	there	are	many	potential	applications	where	AI	could	provide
useful	functionality,	including	automated	vehicles,	traffic	management,	digital	infrastructure,
and	vehicle	and	infrastructure	maintenance.	The	specific	role	that	AI	plays	in	the	context	of	an
application is a major determinant of the types of risks it may pose to the transportation system. To
help	inform	the	understanding	of	AI	risk,	this	section	provides	basic	information	about	AI	uses	in
transportation,	including	contexts,	use	cases,	and	operational	concepts.

Different Contexts of Potential AI Usage

AI-enabled	systems	and	applications	in	the	transportation	system	include	both	vehicles	and
infrastructure.	Figure	1	provides	a	few	examples	of	these	usage	contexts	and	their	relevant
considerations	for	how	risk	should	be	considered.	Specifically,	vehicles	are	manufactured	by	the
private	industry	and	operated	by	private	or	public	operators,	which	bear	individual	and	collective
responsibility	for	safety	to	protect	their	customers	and	the	overall	safety	of	the	public	and	other
stakeholders.	Often,	such	operators	help	ensure	this	by	following	applicable	laws	and	regulations.
The infrastructure, on the other hand, is typically designed, operated, and maintained by public
or	private	infrastructure	providers	in	a	distributed	manner	for	public	use,	such	as	state	and
local	governments.	The	system-wide	responsibility	for	safety-enabling	infrastructure	thus	rests
collectively	on	policymakers	who	must	balance	safety	against	other	considerations,	including
efficiency	and	societal	costs.

Figure 1. Potential systems with AI applications in the overall transportation context.

Transportation System

Vehicles

Systems that move within the
overall transportation system
 (e.g., aircraft, automobiles,
trains, vessels)

Enabling Infrastructure

ò Destinations used for vehicle storage, maintenance, arrival and
departure such as airports, parking lots, stations, docks
ò Paths of travel between destinations, such as airspace, roads,
tracks, waterways
ò Coordination systems that manage vehicle traffic, such as air traffic
control, traffic signals, centralized traffic control, signaling

Before	the	development,	deployment,	and	operations	of	AI	systems,	several	questions	should	be
considered:	(1)	who	is	responsible	for	the	system(s)	(e.g.,	operators,	private	owners,	state/local/
federal	governments);	(2)	who	uses	the	system(s)	(e.g.,	operators,	private	owners,	state/local/
federal	governments)	and	how	they	are	expected	to	do	so;	(3)	rules	and	regulations	defining	how

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

5

the	systems	can	be	legally	operated;	and	(4)	the	cyber-physical	form	that	makes	up	the
operational	system	(e.g.,	a	moving	vehicle	versus	a	static	airport	supporting	many	vehicles).
These	considerations	help	determine	the	overall	implementation	practices	that	must	be	followed	in
the	design	to	mitigate	risk,	as	well	as	how	much	leeway	the	organization	may	have	to	mitigate	AI
risks as they choose.

AI Use Cases

An	AI	use	case	is	a	specific	function	that	AI	performs	within	the	system	concept	of	operations.
Examples	of	typical	AI	use	cases	in	transportation	systems	include	predictive	maintenance,
automated	vehicles,	vehicle	tracking,	driver	behavior	analysis,	and	traffic	management.	Figure
2	shows	several	typical	examples	of	AI	applications	in	automotive	advanced	driver	assistance
systems	and	automated	driving	systems│.	These	use	cases	comprise	broad	functionality	that	may
be performed not just by AI components, but by a larger automated system or subsystem such as
an autopilot or maintenance system.

Figure 2. Examples of AI use cases in transportation.

Object and Event
Detection and
Response

Driver
Monitoring

Dangerous Driving
Recognition

Vehicle
Maintenance
Prediction

Dynamic Platoon
Gaps Identification

Smart Headlight
Activation

Smart Stop/Start
System Activation

Within	these	systems,	AI	components	may	perform	tasks	crucial	to	the	overall	function,	which	may
include, but are not limited to:

Classification Determining if data

belongs in one
category or another
(e.g., recognizing
objects or vehicles on
a roadway)

Detection

Determining if an
event has occurred
(e.g., if a system has
failed or there is a
loss of security)

Prediction

Determining the state of
variable behavior based
on ongoing and historic
trends (e.g., predicting
traffic patterns, prognosis
of vehicle health) to support
a course of action (e.g.,
navigation, maintenance)

These	tasks	may	be	crucial	for	the	operation	of	a	given	automated	system	or	function	because
they enable the automated characterization of system states traditionally performed by an
operator to control the system.

3					M.	Vasudevan,	et	al.,	Identifying	Real-World	Transportation	Applications	Using	Artificial	Intelligence	(AI):	Summary	of	Potential
							Application	of	AI	in	Transportation,	Intelligent	Transportation	Systems	Joint	Program	Office,	Report	no.	FHWA-JPO-20-787,	2020.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation |	September	2024

6

AI-Enabled Operational Concepts

AI components can increase the operational automation of transportation systems by automating
tasks	that	otherwise	would	be	performed	by	human	operators	(e.g.,	drivers	or	pilots).	This	overall
description	of	how	the	system	is	controlled	is	referred	to	as	an	automation concept. Because of
the central responsibility that human operators traditionally play in mitigating hazards, the degree
to	which	the	system	is	automated	can	present	unique	challenges	for	risk management. Typically,
in	the	automated	driving	domain,	the	degree	of	control	that	is	given	to	the	automated	system	is
referred to as the ôlevelö of driving automation	(codified	by	SAE	J3016?	and	other	transportation
standards/resources).	Between	ôfull	human	operationö	and	ôfull	automation,ö	more	discrete	levels
can	be	delineated	between	these	two	levels.	Figure	3	illustrates	the	basic	concept.

Figure 3. Examples of different levels of automation.

y
t
i
l
i

i

b
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
r
o
t
a
r
e
p
O

HUMAN OPERATION

MIXED AUTOMATION

FULL AUTOMATION

Human operates system,
leveraging system features

Human and system collaborate
on tasks to perform mission

Automated system carries out
mission independently

Examples:

Examples:

Examples:

ò Wheel, brake, gas pedal in a car
ò Throttle, brake, switches in a
locomotive
ò Yoke, pedals, throttle-based
controls in an aircraft

ò Driver assist (lane following,
parking assist)
ò Automated train control
ò Modern avionics (autopilot,
ADS-B, ILS)

ò Driverless taxis
ò Automated people movers
ò Autonomous unmanned aerial
vehicles

S
y
s
t
e
m
R
e
s
p
o
n
s
b

i

i
l
i
t
y

In	a	human-operated	system,	the	operator	directly	controls	the	functions	of	the	system	to	achieve
a	mission,	while	in	a	fully	automated	system,	the	system	carries	out	the	mission	independently.
In	a	mixed-automation	concept,	the	operator	and	the	system	may	share	or	trade	control	or
information	over	the	system	to	accomplish	certain	tasks	during	a	mission.

It	should	be	noted	that	each	of	these	automation	concepts	pose	different	types	of	risk:

ò Human-operated systems are subject to human-factors related hazards, such as diminished
skills?	(e.g.,	the	ability	to	perform	complex	maneuvers	as	needed),	loss	of	ability	(e.g.,	sight,
hearing,	or	attention),	or	undesired	intent	(e.g.,	hijacking	or	cybersecurity	breach).	These	hazards
can	arise	from	the	challenge	of	the	task	itself	as	well	as	from	human	variability,	which	can	make
them	difficult	to	characterize	and	fully	eliminate.	Additionally,	because	human-operated	systems
often	leverage	an	in-situ	operator,	they	inherently	contribute	to	some	baseline	risk	because	they
introduce the possibility of operator injury.

4					SAE	J3016,	Taxonomy	and	Definitions	for	Terms	Related	to	Driving	Automation	Systems	for	On-Road	Motor	Vehicles,	2021.

5					Diminished	skills	could	come	from	a	number	of	human	conditions,	such	as	fatigue,	impairment	(e.g.,	drugs	or	alcohol),
							distraction,	workload,	etc.	The	skills	can	be	manual	or	cognitive.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation |	September	2024

7

ò Fully automated systems	are	subject	to	hazards	related	to	the	interaction	between	the
automated	system	and	the	operational	environment.	While	automated	systems	may	perform
better	than	human	operators	at	individual	well-defined	tasks,	(e.g.,	cruise	control),	they	often	are
not	as	effective	at	performing	the	correct	task	in	a	complex	operational	domain	(e.g.,	city	driving).
Additionally,	fully	automated	systems	are	typically	seen	to	have	less	resilience	to	system	failures
or	unexpected	circumstances	than	human	operators,	since	they	lack	the	general	intelligence	to
ôjust	know	what	to	doö	in	these	scenarios.	However,	fully	automated	systems	remove	the	need	for
an	in-situ	operator	who	may	be	injured	when	the	system	fails,	which	may	reduce	the	severity	of
certain hazardous scenarios.

ò Mixed-automated systems are subject to both the hazards related to fully automated systems
and	the	hazards	related	to	human-operated	systems,	while	introducing	a	new	class	of	human-
automation interaction hazards. This does not mean that these systems pose more risk than
solely	human-operated	or	automated	systems,	but	it	does	expand	the	scope	and	complexity	of
hazards	that	may	occur.	For	example,	the	system	may	be	designed	in	a	way	that	the	human
operator	is	able	to	compensate	for	the	hazards	posed	by	the	automated	features	and	vice	versa.
Understanding	human-automation	interactions	is	thus	key	to	understanding	the	overall	risks	posed
by	mixed-automated	systems.

As	discussed	here,	the	context,	use	cases,	and	operational	automation	concept	of	AI	are
important	for	understanding	what	kinds	of	risks	AI	may	pose	to	the	transportation	system.	The	next
section	briefly	introduces	the	basic	concepts	of	AI	hazards	and	risks.	Many	of	these	concepts	are
closely	related	to	AI	contexts,	use	cases,	and	operational	automation	concepts.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation |	September	2024

8

Basic Risk Management Concepts for AI

To	address	AI	risk,	it	is	important	to	first	understand	the	basic	concepts	involved	in	risk analysis.
Risk is a combination of the probability	of	a	hazardous	event	occurring	and	the	severity of the
outcome	of	the	event.	Sources	of	risks	may	be	performance	degradation	(e.g.,	wear	and	tear),
discrepancies	between	the	system	and	its	requirements,	external	hazardous	events	(e.g.,
disasters),	or	random	chance.	When	these	mechanisms	cause	an	event	with	a	potential	for	harm,
it is called a hazard.	Hazards	may	be	called	faults,	defects,	or	errors	in	different	contexts.

AI	risk	is	a	specific	category	of	risk	that	is	related	to	the
integration of AI in the system or the deployment and
operations	of	AI-enabled	systems.	AI	risk-related	activities
include	the	identification	and	analysis	of	the	source,
dependency,	probability,	severity,	and	impacts	of	AI
risks on system functional and operational safety. In the
following	subsections,	we	discuss	different	perspectives
on addressing risk and outline a general three-step
process to manage risk.

Perspectives on Addressing Risk

While	the	overall	concept	of	risk	is	universal,	there	are
different	perspectives	on	risk	analysis	and	mitigation	that
are	used	depending	on	the	specific	concern,	industry,	and
system(s)	involved.	These	perspectives	include:

ò Safety,	which	is	concerned	with	minimizing	damage
to property and harm to people such as injury or death.
Depending on the industry, safety may be stringently
regulated	and	must	be	proven	prior	to	entering	system
operations.

ò Security,	which	is	concerned	with	preventing	intentional
or	unintentional	access	or	control	being	granted	to	external
actors.	This	is	a	relatively	new	consideration	that	is
becoming	more	relevant	as	systems	become	increasingly
connected and automated.

Safety Terms Used in this White-
paper:

ò Harm: Realized damage or injury to
people or property.

ò Hazard: Condition	that	could	lead	to
harm.

ò Fault: Hazardous	event	characterized
by the undesired operation of a system
element.

ò Severity: Measure of harm to
stakeholders from a realized hazard.

ò Probability: Likelihood	of	an	event
occurring	ranging	between	0	and	1,
where	0	means	the	event	could	never
happen,	and	1	means	that	the	event	will
certainly happen.

ò Rate: Expected	number	of	event
occurrences	over	a	given	duration
of	time	(e.g.,	operational	window	or
lifecycle).

ò Risk: Overall	expected	harm	borne
from a hazard or set of hazards. Risk
is a combination of probability and
severity.

ò Safety: Determination that a set of
risks in the system satisfy desired
requirements	to	the	overall	allowable
probabilities of harms to people and
property.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation |	September	2024

9

ò Reliability,	which	is	concerned	with	lowering	the	rate	of	component	or	system	failures	below	a
certain	threshold.	Reliability	engineering	is	a	long-standing	discipline	with	standardized	tools	and
techniques.

ò Resilience,	which	is	concerned	with	making	sure	that	the	system	can	mitigate	hazards	as
they	arise,	ensuring	safe	outcomes,	both	by	proactively	avoiding	them	and	by	restoring	key
functionality soon after they occur.

Each	of	these	perspectives	can	be	important	for	addressing	risks,	but	that	does	not	mean	that	one
is	a	substitute	for	another.	Particularly,	the	safety	perspective	is	often	important	for	being	able	to
prove	to	a	regulator	that	a	system	is	fit	to	operate,	while	reliability	and	resilience	perspectives	are
more	important	for	mission	fulfillment	and	economic	considerations.

A major challenge and unifying thread in risk management is the importance of human factors. All
AI-enabled	transportation	systems	(even	ones	with	the	highest	level	of	automation)	will	encounter
humans in one form or the other throughout their lifecycle. Humans can be both a source of risk
and	a	risk	mitigation	factor	in	AI-enabled	transportation	systems.	For	example,	a	human	can	cause
accidents	and	mishaps	or	prevent	them,	depending	on	the	system	design	and	their	response	to
hazardous	conditions.	As	a	result,	any	comprehensive	assessment	of	AI	risks	will	not	be	complete
without	the	consideration	of	human	elements.	This	perspective	is	discussed	further	in	the	section,
ôHuman	Considerations	in	AI	Risks.ö

AI Risk Management

Three steps are usually taken to address potential AI risks in the system and its operations: risk
identification, assessment, and mitigation	(RIAM,	Figure	4).

Figure 4. Three common steps to manage AI risks.

Risk mitigation

Risk identification

Risk assessment

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

10

ò Risk identification	is	the	first	step	to	identify	potential	AI	hazards	in	the	system	or	its	operations.
It	often	considers	AIÆs	context,	use,	and	automation	concept	as	well	as	the	potential	events	that
may	arise	within	its	scope	of	use.

ò Risk assessment is the determination of the properties of hazards, including their causes and
effects,	as	well	as	an	overall	assessment	of	its	probability,	severity,	and	overall	risk.

ò Risk mitigation is the minimization of the risks posed by hazard through dedicated measures
such	as	elimination,	prevention,	operational	avoidance,	active	monitoring,	and	contingency
management	and/or	recovery.	Risk	mitigation	is	often	performed	in	conjunction	with	risk
identification	and	assessment	to	determine	the	effectiveness	of	mitigation	measures	in	reducing
risk	against	the	new	risks	they	may	introduce	by	failing.

These steps can be performed in both design-time and operation-time of automated systems, as
shown	in	Table	1.

Table 1. Risk-related techniques in design-time and operation-time.

Activities

Design-Time Assurance

Operation-Time Assurance

Risk Identification

Risk Assessment

Risk Mitigation

Identify occurrence of hazards and
risks from the designs of the systems
including design requirements, design
data, implemented systems, and design
environment.

Assess the properties of AI risks based
on design documents, prototype/test
data,	well-documented	knowledge	and
experience,	analytic	models,	or	lessons
learned.

Reduce	or	remove	potential	safety
risks by adding safety features to the
design, eliminating failure mechanisms,
adding architectural features such as
redundancy, and/or imposing design
requirements	(e.g.,	on	reliability	or
required	contingency).

Identify occurrence of hazards and
risks	in	operations,	which	were	not
discovered	in	design	time,	considering
operational requirements and data,
human aspects, deployed systems, and
operational	environment.

Assess the properties of AI risks based
on	operation-time	data	and	events,
which	are	not	predicted	during	design
time.

Reduce	or	remove	potential	safety	risks
by entering emergency/safety modes
taking	the	system	offline,	avoiding
hazardous	mission	profiles,	and/or
performing maintenance actions.

The	following	sections	describe	the	RIAM	process	in	more	detail	as	it	relates	to	AI	components
and AI-enabled systems.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

11

AI Risk Identification

The	first	step	of	the	risk	assessment	process	is	risk	identification.	Conventionally,	this	identification
is	performed	by	brainstorming	potential	risks	and	using	operational	experience	from	previous
similar	systems	to	create	an	overall	list	of	hazards.	Because	AI-enabled	systems	are	relatively
novel,	there	may	be	a	lack	of	operational	experience	to	base	this	identification	on,	making
systematic	identification	processes,	outlined	here,	crucial	to	addressing	risks	before	the	system
enters operations.

Preparation for Risk Identification

To	prepare	for	risk	identification,	the	context	and	use	cases	of	the	AI-enabled	system	should
be	well-understood,	as	well	as	the	overall	system	automation	concept.	As	such,	prior	to	risk
identification	it	may	be	helpful	to	gather	information	related	to	the	tasks(s)	being	performed	and
develop	an	understanding	of	how	the	system	functionally	interacts	with	its	environment	(interfacing
functions,	operators,	components,	etc.),	as	exemplified	in	Figure	5.	This	usage	context	will	help
determine	how	hazards	will	affect	the	operators,	other	vehicles,	and	the	transportation	system	as
a	whole.

Figure 5. Hazard contexts in transportation systems.

Other Vehicles
and Actors

Infrastructure

Environment

Operations
and Operators

Components

Function(s) and System(s)

Vehicle

Figure	5	illustrates	examples	of	different	usage	contexts	and	their	interactions	within	the
transportation	system.	Within	this	model	of	the	transportation	system,	hazards	may	(1)	originate
in	a	particular	context	of	the	system,	(2)	create	hazardous	interactions	between	context
elements,	and	(3)	cause	harm	in	context	elements.	Understanding	these	interactions	is	crucial	for
determining	how	hazardous	events	may	arise	in	AI	functions,	as	well	as	the	potential	effects	and
harms	these	events	may	cause.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

12

Based on the usage of the AI, it should then be possible to determine the type of safety role that
the	component	plays	in	the	overall	system.	Roles	for	AI	components	may	be	categorized	by	their
criticality	to	mission	safety	and	operations,	as	shown	in	Figure	6.	Note	that	complexity	of	the
distributed	system	(or	system	of	systems)	will	tend	to	increase	the	difficulty	in	understanding	the
roles, interdependencies, and safety risks of each component.

Figure 6. Types of roles given to AI components and prototypical associated hazards for road vehicles.

SUPPORTING ROLE

FUNCTIONAL ROLE

SAFETY-CRITICAL ROLE

AI performs a tertiary function
unrelated to the mission

AI performs mission-related tasks
unrelated to safety

AI performs tasks directly related to
mission safety

Examples:

Examples:

Examples:

ò Infotainment system recommendation
interface

ò Traffic prediction for vehicle navigation
ò Non-essential maintenance prediction

Potential Hazards:

Potential Hazards:

ò Loss of tertiary features
ò Degraded operator performance

ò Inability to complete mission as desired
ò Task outcomes that lead to unsafe
conditions (e.g., stranded vehicle)

ò Obstacle detection for collision avoidance
ò Safety-related maintenance prediction
ò Lane recognition

Potential Hazards:

ò Direct impact on people and property in
and around the system
ò Damage to/loss of system

While	classifying	the	roles	of	AI	components	does	not	itself	demonstrate	that	they	are	safe	(or	that
a	given	automation	concept	is	safe),	it	can	help	determine	the	overall	risk	contribution	and	risk
tolerance	for	the	component,	as	well	as	the	overall	needs	of	the	hazard	assessment.	In	functional
and	supporting	roles,	for	example,	less	performance/reliability	is	necessary	from	the	AI	function
to	achieve	safe	operations	and	risk	mitigation	may	be	simple.	Putting	AI	functions	in	safety-critical
roles,	however,	necessitates	stringent	requirements	for	risk	mitigation.

Hazard Identification

Once	the	role	and	context	of	the	AI	function	has	been	characterized,	its	hazards	can	then
be	identified.	While	there	are	many	methodologies	that	may	be	used	to	support	the	hazard
identification	process	(such	as	FHA?,	HARA?,	STAMP/STPA?,	and	others),	the	output	of	these
analyses	is	a	table	with:

ò	causes	(otherwise	known	as	mechanisms)	of	hazards,

6					Defined	in	SAE	ARP-4761A,	Guidelines	for	Conducting	the	Safety	Assessment	Process	on	Civil	Aircraft,	Systems,	and	Equipment.

7					Defined	in	ISO	26262,	Road	vehicles	-	Functional	safety.

8					Nancy	Leveson	and	John	Thomas,	STPA	Handbook,	2018:	https://psas.scripts.mit.edu/home/get_file.php?name=STPA_
       handbook.pdf

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

13

ò	hazards	themselves	(e.g.,	behaviors,	interactions,	or	more	general	concerns),

ò harms that may potentially result from these hazards, and

ò	other	industry	or	methodology-specific	fields	based	on	the	standard	(e.g.,	ARP-4761A?,	ISO-
26262╣?,	and	ARP-926C╣╣)	or	methodology.

Table	2	provides	example	outputs	of	the	hazard	identification	process.

Table 2. Example outputs of the hazard identification process in different contexts for AI components.

Context

AI-Enabled Functions Hazards

Potential Harms

Vehicle

Localization and mapping Insufficient	situation

Vehicle/object detection
and	avoidance

Planning	and	control

awareness

Avoiding	non-existing
objects, hitting unseen
objects

Violation of operational
rules

AI-based human interface Misunderstanding human

Human Interfaces

Human/automation
interface

intent

Undesired control
handoff,	lack	of	control
handoff	when	desired

Environment

Traffic	control	and
signaling

Inability to recognize
vehicles

Crash,	stop	of	service,
adverse	navigation

Crash,	stop	of	service,
adverse	navigation

Crash,	stop	of	service,
illegal	driving	behavior,
interruption	of	traffic

Undesired	vehicle	control
input

Operator cannot control
vehicle	or	mitigate
hazards.	Crash,	stop	of
service,	etc.

Vehicles stopped
inappropriately,	vehicles
directed into occupied
space

Once	hazard	analysis	is	completed	and	hazards	are	identified,	additional	risk	identification
analysis	may	be	necessary	to	ensure	all	potential	hazards	were	considered	in	the	identification	of
safety-critical AI components.

9					SAE	Aerospace	Recommended	Practice	ARP4761A,	Guidelines	and	Methods	for	Conducting	the	Safety	Assessment	Process
							on	Civil	Airborne	Systems	and	Equipment,	2023.

10				ISO	26262-1:2018.	Road	vehicles	ù	Functional	safety,	2018.

11				SAE	Aerospace	Recommended	Practice	ARP926C,	Design	Analysis	Procedure	for	Failure	Mode,	Effects	and	Criticality
								Analysis	(FMECA),	2018.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

14

AI Risk Assessment

Once	hazards	have	been	identified	and	analyzed	for	an	AI-enabled	system,	the	hazards	may
be	assessed	in	terms	of	risk.	Risk	has	two	main	components:	severity,	which	refers	to	how	bad
the	consequences	of	a	hazard	are	(e.g.,	a	vehicle	loses	control	and	crashes),	and	probability,
which	refers	to	how	likely	it	is	for	the	hazard	to	arise.	Severity	and	probability	may	be	quantified
on	scales	relevant	to	the	industry	and	subsequently	multiplied	to	determine	the	risk	of	the	hazard
using	Equation	1,	where	R	is	risk,	P	is	probability,	and	S	is	severity.

Equation 1. Assessing risk of a hazard.

R	=	P	*	S

This	relationship	is	illustrated	in	the	risk	matrix	shown	in	Figure	7,	where	high	probability/severity
hazards	pose	higher	risk	and	low	probability/severity	hazards	pose	less	risk.	Note	that	many
different	standards	and	frameworks	exist	for	risk	consideration	that	vary	by	domain,	including
the	levels	of	severity/probability	considered	as	well	as	the	risk	equation	itself.	For	example,	in
the	automotive	industry,	the	automotive safety integrity level is calculated as a combination of
severity, exposure and controllability,	since	both	exposure	and	controllability	are	factors	fed	into
the	probability	of	the	severe	outcome	being	realized.

Figure 7. Risk matrix concept and examples in industry.

y
t
i
r
e
v
e
S

h
g
h

i

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

w
o

l

high
risk

moderate
risk

low
risk

low

moderate
Probability

high

Risk Assessment Matrix in
FAA-H-8083-2A

Automotive Safety Integrity
Level in ISO-26262

Calculating	risk	in	AI	functions	is	challenging	because	the	probability	of	failure	is	difficult	to	assess.
Failure	rates	in	traditional	software	components	are	often	considered	to	be	ôimpossible	to	quantifyö
because they are considered to arise from design errors, rather than physical mechanisms or
variability	(RTCA	DO-178╣▓).	However,	this	concept	does	not	necessarily	generalize	to	AI/ML

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

15

because	their	performance	is	statistical	in	nature,	which	introduces	variability	into	their	ability	to
perform	their	given	function	(and	therefore,	a	failure	probability).	Understanding	AI	risk	probability
should	thus	in	part	flow	out	of	understanding	the	statistical	performance	of	these	components.
However,	this	may	be	difficult	to	calculate	because	many	of	the	hazards	that	are	expected	to
arise	often	come	from	operating	on	input	data	that	was	not	considered	in	training	(i.e.,	unforeseen
situations).

Finally,	while	the	risks	of	various	hazards	are	often	considered	individually	in	hazard	identification,
it	is	important	to	remember	that	each	hazard	is	only	one	component	of	the	overall	risk	posed
by	the	system.	This	is	particularly	relevant	when	the	system	itself	is	subject	to	overall	safety
requirements	on	the	overall	allowable	probability	of	specific	harms.	Risk	assessment	should	thus
be performed at:

ò	The	system	level	to	determine	whether	overall	requirements	are	met	(i.e.,	that	the	risks	posed	by
all	hazards	will	meet	requirements).

ò	The	individual	component	hazard	level	to	determine	which	hazards	pose	the	most	risk	and	thus
are the highest priority to mitigate.

Increasing	complexity	of	a	system	or	system	of	systems,	such	as	AI	functions	performing	Object
and	Event	Detection	and	Response	(OEDR)	tasks	in	transportation	systems,	makes	assessing
functional	interdependencies	of	components	and	subsystems	on	overall	vehicle	and	system	safety
outcomes more challenging.

Based	on	how	requirements	are	met	(or	not),	the	risk	assessment	process	motivates	the	mitigation
of	hazards,	which	is	explained	in	the	following	section.

12					RTCA	DO-178C,	Software	Considerations	in	Airborne	Systems	and	Equipment	Certification,	2012.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation |	September	2024

16

Mitigating AI Risks

Risk	mitigation	is	the	process	of	reducing	the	probability	and/or	severity	of	hazards	in	a	system	so
that	the	overall	risks	to	be	borne	in	operations	meets	requirements.	Reducing	risk	may	occur	by
reducing	the	probability	and/or	the	severity	of	a	given	hazard.	Two	general	design	strategies	may
be	used	to	reduce	the	overall	risk	that	AI	components	pose	to	system	operationsùsystem-level
risk mitigation and component risk mitigation.

System-Level Risk Mitigation

System-level	risk	mitigation	for	AI	is	the	process	of	reducing	risk	that	occurs	outside	of	a
component	but	within	the	interfacing	systems	and	functions	that	the	component	interacts	with.	This
mitigation	often	occurs	earlier	in	the	design	process,	as	it	involves	changing	the	overall	concept
and	requirements	of	the	system	that	flow	down	to	the	AI	design.	Reducing	risk	at	this	level	may
take	two	forms,	illustrated	in	Figure	8:

					1.	Reducing	the	probability	of	failure	by	reducing	the	operational	complexity.	This	makes	the
        task easier for the AI system to perform, thus decreasing its probability of failure.

				2.	Reducing	the	severity	of	failure	by	limiting	the	AI	responsibility.	This	makes	it	so	that	AI
								system	failures	result	in	fewer	harms,	thus	decreasing	failure	severity.

Figure 8. Mitigating AI risks during system function allocation.

Reduced Operational
Complexity

Unmitigated
Failure Risk

y
t
i
r
e
v
e
S

h
g
h

i

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

w
o

l

Combined
Mitigation

Reduced AI
Responsibility

low

moderate
Probability

high

Reducing hazard probability by limiting task complexity means reducing the variability of the
operational	environment.	This	is	illustrated	in	Figure	9,	which	shows	low-	and	high-complexity
environments	for	automation.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation |	September	2024

17

Figure 9. Examples of low- and high-complexity automation environments.

Low Complexity

Moderate Complexity

High Complexity

An automated people mover (APM) has
low complexity because it operates on
a fixed guideway that is protected from
potential conflicts.

Driving in a highway context has
moderate complexity because the
expectations of road use are narrowly-
defined, forgiving, and predictable.

Driving in an urban street context has
high complexity because of the varying
perception and communications tasks the
operator must perform to safely interact
with the environment.

In	practice,	examples	of	reducing	environmental	variability	at	the	vehicle	level	may	include:

ò	Operating	only	on	highways	instead	of	busy	streets	(self-driving	cars).

ò	Operating	only	in	a	prescribed	right	of	way	(trains).

ò	Operating	only	in	specific	airports/routes	where	training	data	has	been	acquired	(aircraft).

At	the	infrastructure	level,	reducing	environmental	variability	is	a	part	of	the	design	of	the	overall
transportation	system.	Particularly,	reducing	vehicle	conflicts	and	simplifying	the	intended	uses
of	infrastructure	may	make	it	easier	for	automated	vehicles	to	perform	safely	in	the	overall
transportation system.

Reducing	hazard	severity	may	be	accomplished	by	reducing	the	role	of	AI	so	that	it	does	not	affect
the	safe	operation	of	the	system.	This	could	mean	giving	the	AI-enabled	system	tasks	that	have
a	lower-criticality	role	(as	outlined	in	Figure	6)	assigned	to	the	AI	function,	as	opposed	to	higher-
criticality	roles,	thereby	making	failure	effects	less	severe.	Often,	this	is	infeasible	if	the	goal	or
desired	innovation	of	the	system	is	to	act	on	its	own.	However,	this	can	also	be	achieved	in	part	by
reducing	the	scope	of	AI	functions	to	only	the	tasks	where	they	are	necessary	(e.g.,	for	perception
tasks	but	not	controls	or	planning	tasks)	and	by	relying	on	external	functionality	(e.g.,	operator
takeover	or	redundant	safety	monitoring	systems)	to	achieve	a	higher	level	of	safety.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation |	September	2024

18

Component Risk Mitigation

Component	risk	mitigation	is	the	process	of	reducing	risk	that	occurs	within	the	AI	component.
Component	risk	mitigation	at	this	level	is	thus	a	matter	of	mitigating	the	faults	that	would	cause
functional	failures	in	the	system,	which	can	be	achieved	by	reducing	their	probability	or	severity,
as	illustrated	in	Figure	10.

Figure 10. Mitigating AI risks during component and system design or implementation.

Improved AI
Performance

Unmitigated
Failure Risk

y
t
i
r
e
v
e
S

h
g
h

i

t

e
a
r
e
d
o
m

w
o

l

Combined
Mitigation

Improved
Redundancy

low

moderate

high

Probability

In	the	context	of	component	risk	mitigation,	reducing	the	probability	of	component	failure	involves
improving	the	performance	of	the	AI	components	over	a	wide	range	of	scenarios	(including	known
failure	modes,	such	as	optical	illusion)	such	that	it	is	within	acceptable	bounds	for	the	given	task.

Reducing	the	severity	of	component	failure,	on	the	other	hand,	may	be	achieved	in	part	by
reducing	the	effects	of	individual	AI	component	failures	on	the	function	achieved	by	the	AI-
enabled	system.	This	can	be	accomplished	by	introducing	diverse	confirming	checks	at	safety-
critical	decision	points	(either	alternative	AI	or	traditional	functions),	redundancy,	or	fail-safety	at
the	component	level	(e.g.,	ensemble	models,	runtime	monitors,	self-diagnosis,	etc.)	to	ensure
that	individual	training	faults	do	not	result	in	functional	failures	for	the	AI	component.	To	do	this,
mitigations	should	ensure	that	they	are	not	subject	to	common	mode	errorsùerrors	in	which
individual	fault	modes	affect	multiple	redundant	parts	(e.g.,	multiple	models	in	an	ensemble	failing
due	to	poor	training).

Risk Management Strategy

One	important	concept	for	system-wide	risk	mitigation	involves	defense-in-depth,	safety
architectures,	and	the	related	Swiss	cheese	model╣│,	illustrated	in	Figure	11.

13					Reason,	J.	(1997).	Managing	the	Risks	of	Organizational	Accidents	(1st	ed.).	Routledge.	https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315543543

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation |	September	2024

19

Figure 11. Swiss cheese model for AI hazard mitigation approaches (Wikipedia╣?).

Implementation
Practices

Runtime
Monitoring

Hazard
Elimination

Testing
Approaches

Post-Hazard
Recovery

In	this	model,	different	hazards	are	mitigated	via	distinct	approaches,	meaning	that	reducing
overall	risk	involves	a	combination	of	approaches.	This	is	similar	to	the	concept	of	a	safety
architecture,	which	codifies	the	causes	and	effects	of	various	hazards,	as	well	as	the	mitigating
(prevention	and	recovery)	factors	that	are	in	place	to	avoid	worst-case	outcomes.

Given	the	diverse	sources	and	effects	of	hazards,	it	is	recommended	to	recognize	the	importance
of	using	multiple	types	of	approaches	to	maintain	and	assure	safety.	Table	3	provides	examples	of
hazard mitigation approaches and their goals.

Table 3. Examples of hazard mitigation approaches.

Approach Type

Practices

Goal of Approach

Implementation
Practices

Monitoring
Features

Architectural
Features

Hazard/Safety
Approaches

Model	validation	and	explainability

Run-time assurance, health
management, self-diagnosis

Catch	design	and	implementation
errors before they are put in operation

Detect poor in-time performance
to	activate	safe	modes	and	other
mitigations

Multi-model redundancies, algorithmic
robustness

Improve	AI	performance	and	safety
failure tolerance

Safety and hazard assessment

Systematically identify, track, and
address	all	known	safety	issues

This	section	described	different	methods	to	identify,	assess,	and	mitigate	AI-related	risks	in	the
context	of	an	overall	risk	strategy.	The	next	section	will	present	a	necessary	consideration	for
effectively	managing	AI	risks:	human	factors.

14					https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swiss_cheese_model#/media/File:Swiss_cheese_model_textless.svg

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

20

Human Considerations in AI Risks

Because of the key roles that humans play in designing, implementing, operating, and interfacing
with	AI-enabled	systems	over	their	lifecycle,	human	elements	are	worth	additional	consideration
in the management of AI risks. To enable the mitigation of human risks in AI-enabled systems,
it	is	important	to	first	understand	what	roles	humans	will	play	in	the	overall	system,	the	scope	of
human	interactions	with	AI,	and	what	hazards	may	arise	due	to	these	interactions.	These	risks
may	then	be	mitigated	through	the	processes	discussed	previously	as	well	as	via	improved
organizational	barriers	(e.g.,	safety	policies	and	protocols,	company	culture,	etc.)	or	human	factors
requirements	(e.g.,	personnel	requirements,	operating	procedures	design,	training,	interface
design,	etc.).

Human Actors in AI-Enabled Systems

Human	actors	may	take	different	roles	when	interacting	with	AI-enabled	transportation	systems.
High-level	actors	include	developers,	operators,	maintainers,	sustainers,	consumers,	and
bystanders	(Figure	12).

Figure 12. Human actors in the AI lifecycle.

Developer

Operator

Maintainer

Sustainer

Consumer

Bystander

The	roles	that	human	actors	may	assume	are	not	exclusive,	meaning	that	the	same	people	may
serve	multiple	roles.	For	example,	developers	may	also	be	maintainers,	consumers	may	be
operators, and so on.

ò Developer:	Design,	develop,	and	deploy	systems.

ò Operator:	Contribute	to	the	operation	of	the	system	locally	(e.g.,	car	drivers)	or	remotely	(e.g.,
ground	operations	of	unmanned	aircraft	systems).

ò Maintainer: Maintain and manage changes in the system after the deployment until end-of-
lifecycle to ensure optimal performance and safety.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

21

ò Sustainer: Ensure that AI-enabled systems are safe, ethical, responsible, and usable for
intended	use	cases	(for	instance,	regulators,	standard	committees,	infrastructure	providers,	and
maintainers).

ò Consumer:	End	users	of	AI-enabled	systems	(e.g.,	vehicle	owners,	robotaxi	and	airtaxi
passengers).

ò Bystander:	Any	other	actors	who	are	not	actively	involved	with	the	system	but	who	can	affect
system	behavior	(e.g.,	pedestrians	for	road	vehicles,	manned	aircraft	pilots	for	unmanned	aircraft
systems).

Scope of Human-AI Interactions

With	increasing	levels	of	automation,	the	paradigm	of	human-system	interactions	shifts	from
human	control	to	human-system	collaboration,	where	the	human	and	AI-enabled	systems
collaborate	to	achieve	the	intended	system	functions	(see	Figure	13).

Figure 13. The scope of human-system interactions in automation.

Human Control

Level of Autonomy

Human-AI
Collaboration

As	a	result,	the	scope	of	interactions	for	each	of	the	human	actors	in	the	system	varies	with
the	level	of	automation.	For	example,	a	maintainer	of	a	system	with	low	levels	of	automation
might	have	to	analyze	the	system	state	and	perform	maintenance	while	relying	on	preexisting
maintenance	schedules.	On	the	other	hand,	a	system	with	high	levels	of	automation	will
intelligently	assess	its	health	state	and	collaborate	with	the	maintainers	to	complete	the	needed
maintenance	(which	may	be	done	by	the	system	itself,	with	the	maintainer	providing	guidance,	or
by	the	maintainer,	with	the	system	providing	guidance).

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

22

Risk Considerations

While	the	risk	factors	for	human-AI	interactions	may	vary	based	on	the	role	of	the	human	and	the
scope	of	interactions,	common	high-level	risk	considerations	include	(see	Figure	14):

Figure 14. Risk considerations for human-in-the-loop.

Design

Situation
Awareness

Workload

Level of Trust

Understandability

Security

Ethics

ò Design:	Design	of	AI-enabled	transportation	systems	is	ultimately	a	human-driven	process	that
is	prone	to	human	error.	Human	errors	that	go	undetected	during	the	design	process	(e.g.,	errors
during	data	labeling	or	risk	assessments)	may	lead	to	systems	that	are	poorly	designed,	which
may	cause	higher	risk	of	failure	during	operations.	Moreover,	a	poor	human	factor	design	could
lead	to	human	performance	issues	(e.g.,	a	confusing	user	interface).

ò Situation Awareness:	Situation	awareness	may	contribute	to	safety	positively	(when
appropriate	levels	are	present)	and	negatively	(when	deteriorated).	In	a	human-AI	collaborative
environment,	both	human	and	AI	components	must	maintain	appropriate	levels	of	situational
awareness	of	each	otherÆs	state,	intent,	and	environment.	For	example,	in	a	self-driving	car,	the
car	may	hand	off	control	to	the	driver	when	the	driver	is	not	paying	attention	if	the	car	is	not	aware
of	the	state	of	the	driver.	Similarly,	a	driver	who	is	not	aware	of	the	carÆs	state	may	not	be	prepared
to	handle	emergencies.	However,	if	both	the	car	and	driver	have	appropriate	levels	of	situational
awareness,	they	may	collaboratively	prevent	failures	by	complementing	each	otherÆs	performance.

ò Workload:	High	or	low	workload	will	negatively	affect	human	performance.	In	a	human-AI
collaborative	environment,	when	a	human	is	expected	to	interact	with	the	system	and	perform
tasks,	the	workload	of	the	human	must	be	maintained	at	appropriate	levels.	This	is	especially
crucial	in	cases	where	humans	are	expected	to	interact	with	the	system	only	for	contingency
management	because	they	go	from	a	state	of	low	workload	(before	a	safety	issue)	to	a	state	of
high	stress	and	high	workload	(once	they	are	prompted	to	manage	safety).	In	a	poorly	designed
system, this sudden transition may lead to poor human performance.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

23

ò Level of trust:	In	a	human-AI	environment,	too	much	trust	may	lead	to	complacency,	while	low
trust may result in underutilization. If humans place too much trust in AI-enabled systems, they
may	use	the	systems	in	ways	that	were	not	intended	by	design.	An	example	of	this	is	a	human
driver	sleeping	in	a	self-driving	car	when	the	car	is	designed	with	an	expectation	of	the	driver
taking	control	during	an	emergency.	In	cases	where	there	is	low	trust,	humans	may	not	use
AI-enabled	systems	in	scenarios	where	they	should.	For	instance,	due	to	low	trust,	an	air	traffic
controller	may	not	use	an	AI-based	traffic	management	system	that	aims	to	reduce	the	employeeÆs
workload.

ò Understandability:	The	design	of	AI-enabled	systems	must	be	explainable	to	allow	humans
to	understand	system	behaviors.	Lack	of	understanding	in	AI	system	behaviors	may	lead	to
mis-calibrated	trust	and	situation	awareness,	increasing	the	risk	of	failure.	Similarly,	AI-enabled
systems should possess the ability to understand human actions during human-AI interactions.
Inability	to	understand	human	actions	may	diminish	the	situational	awareness	of	AI-enabled
systems.

ò Security: AI-enabled systems may encounter misuse and abuse throughout their lifecycle due to
factors	such	as	over-	or	under-utilization,	operating	outside	of	operational	envelopes,	and	malice.
Humans	may	either	be	a	source	of	these	vulnerabilities	or	help	prevent	them	depending	on	their
role in the system.

ò Ethics:	An	AI-enabled	system	that	is	not	ethical	can	pose	risks.	For	example,	a	self-driving
car	that	was	developed	without	ethical	considerations	may	break	the	law,	posing	safety	risks
for	its	passengers.	Other	ethics-related	considerations	include	accountability,	bias,	privacy,	and
security.	It	is	widely	accepted	that	even	in	a	fully	automated	system,	some	level	of	judgement	and
accountability	(generally	imposed	by	the	developer	as	requirements	on	the	system)	is	necessary
to ensure that it comprises an ethical system.

Not	all	risk	considerations	have	relevance	to	all	human	actors.	However,	when	they	are	relevant,
humans	may	contribute	positively	(that	is,	mitigate)	or	negatively	(that	is,	be	a	source)	to	the	risk
considerations.	For	example,	operators,	depending	on	their	skills	and	experience,	may	mitigate
or	exacerbate	workload-related	risks.	The	risk	considerations	themselves	may	lead	to	other	risks.
The	level	of	present	risk	due	to	each	of	these	risk	considerations	may	vary	during	the	lifecycle	of
the	system.	For	example,	level	of	trust	may	be	improved	or	deteriorate	over	time	depending	on
how	the	system	performs	in	operation.	Additionally,	the	level	of	risk	from	each	risk	consideration
may	vary	depending	on	the	individual	who	is	interacting	with	the	system.	For	example,	security-
related	risks	may	increase	when	a	novice	operator	interacts	with	the	system	compared	to	an
experienced	operator.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

24

Perspective

This	whitepaper	presents	fundamental	aspects	of	AI	risks	and	serves	as	a	starting	point	for	more
advanced	topics	related	to	AI	risks	and	their	management.	Because	of	the	high-level	nature	of	this
whitepaper,	it	is	also	expected	that	subsequent	technical	papers	in	the	U.S.	DOT	AI	Assurance
Whitepaper	Series	will	cover	more	advanced	topics.	Additionally,	due	to	the	many	unknowns	and
uncertainties	present	in	the	development	of	AI-enabled	HATS,	there	are	still	challenges	in	the
main	steps	of	risk	identification,	risk	assessment,	risk	mitigation,	and	human-AI	considerations:

ò Risk identification,	including	the	coverage	of	identified	risks.	In	particular,	there	is	not	a	way
presently	to	have	confidence	that	hazard	identification	has	uncovered	all	potential	internal	and
external	hazards.

ò Risk assessment,	including	modeling	impact	and	propagation	of	AI	risks	in	complex	systems.
Because	AI-enabled	systems	play	an	important	role	in	the	control	flow	of	the	system	and	have
a	potentially	large	input/output	space,	as	well	as	stochastic	performance,	it	may	be	difficult	to
understand	the	full	risk	of	automating	a	given	system	with	AI.	This	is	further	complicated	by
roles	in	which	the	AI-enabled	system	must	perform	hazard-mitigation	actions	in	rare	hazardous
circumstances.

ò Risk mitigation,	including	the	efficiency	of	mitigation	mechanisms.	The	challenge	is	validating
that	active	hazard	mitigation	by	AI	systems	can	be	effective	given	interactions	between	AI-enabled
systems,	operators,	vehicles,	and	infrastructure.	Other	challenges	include	identifying	appropriate
mechanisms	to	mitigate	unpredicted	risks	and	determining	combinations	of	different	risk	mitigation
mechanisms.

ò Human-AI considerations, including human interactions and process considerations. The
automation of human-performed functions minimizes the ability of humans to mitigate hazards.
The challenge is to assess this lost human contribution and understand if the AI-enabled system
adequately	compensates	for	it.	Rather	than	being	considered	a	system-level	construct,	the
human	elements	should	be	accounted	for	in	component-level	design	tasks,	where	risks	relating	to
understandability,	trustworthiness,	ethics,	and	security	can	be	better	addressed.

Further	collaboration	between	government	agencies,	industry,	and	academia	to	explore,	develop,
and	test	AI	risk-related	technologies	may	help	support	overall	efforts	to	address	the	safety	of
AI-enabled	highly	automated	systems	in	transportation.	These	technologies	should	cover	the
following	topics:	risk	identification,	risk	assessment,	risk	mitigation,	human-AI	considerations,	data
management, social impact, policies, and regulation.

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation | September 2024

25

AI Risk-Related Research at HASS COE and
NASA SWS

AI risk assessment and mitigation is an important research area of U.S. DOTÆs AI Assurance
Program╣?,	coordinated	by	HASS	COE.	In	this	program,	HASS	COE	and	its	partners	explore
AI	risks	from	several	different	perspectives,	including	autonomous	aircraft,	highly	automated
systems	(surface),	and	highway	traffic	management	systems,	as	well	as	generative	AI.	Technical
topics	of	this	exploration	are	not	limited	to	those	already	presented	in	this	whitepaper,	but	also
include	support	to	safety	standards,	safety	impact	analysis,	and	support	to	potential	certification.
HASS	COE	works	closely	with	U.S.	DOT	Operating	Administrations	(including	the	Federal
Aviation	Administration	[FAA]	and	the	Federal	Highway	Administration)	and	other	federal	partners
(including	the	National	Aeronautics	and	Space	Administration	[NASA],	National	Institute	of
Standards	and	Technology	[NIST],	and	Department	of	Defense)	to	advance	this	research.

The	NASA	System-Wide	Safety	(SWS)	project╣?	conducts	research	and	development	on
technologies	to	maintain	the	safety	of	the	national	airspace	as	it	is	transformed	by	new
technologies	such	as	AI/ML,	advanced	air	mobility,	electric	vertical	takeoff	and	landing,	unmanned
aircraft	systems	(UAS),	and	UAS	Traffic	Management.	To	this	end,	the	SWS	project	pursues	a
number	of	technical	challenges	related	to	design	safety,	verification	and	validation,	and	operational
assurance	of	these	concepts	in	the	near-	and	long-term.	The	SWS	project	works	in	partnership
with	industry,	government	(including	FAA	and	NIST),	and	academic	partners	to	incubate	safety
technologies from the cutting-edge of research into standard industry practice.

15					U.S.	DOT	AI	Assurance	Program:	https://www.transportation.gov/hasscoe/highlights/AI-assurance

16					https://www.nasa.gov/directorates/armd/aosp/sws/sws-project-leadership

Understanding AI Risks in Transportation |	September	2024

26


