Con 1: The gig economy creates job insecurity.
Gig workers do not have a permanent job and routinely live on the verge of unemployment. A study of gig workers in Australia reported that they face “higher rates of stress than the general population” because of the “uncertainty, unpredictability, and instability of both schedules and income earned.” [17]
Companies also suffer from the gig economy mentality, said human resources expert Riia O’Donnell: “While a freelancer wants to keep you as a client, your company’s individual success is not their priority.” As she explains, “A full-time employee is likely to feel a higher level of commitment to your organisation, and therefore more motivated to add to the bottom line. In-house employees are aware of everything that’s going on in the company, and can leverage that knowledge to your advantage when building relationships with clients. Freelancers don’t have that access.” [11]
Gig workers also generally don’t have opportunities for career advancement, further splintering them from the company. While gig workers may be theoretically in favor of not “climbing the corporate ladder,” they also have few opportunities for promotions, significant salary increases, or bonuses for a job well done. Employers have little to no incentive to raise wages when they can easily replace a gig worker with yet another gig worker. [18]
Furthermore, gig workers usually do not have coworkers. So not only is there no one with whom they can celebrate wins or grumble about the boss, but there is no one to stave off loneliness during the workday. Gig workers aren’t going out to lunch with their coworkers or chatting at the proverbial water cooler. Without this support, job dissatisfaction can grow, leaving gig workers to bounce between jobs looking for fulfillment, which in turn further increases job instability in an economy that still favors full-time employees, company loyalty, and a stable work history. [19]
Con 2: The gig economy lacks traditional job benefits.
Traditional job benefits can include sick days, vacation days, health insurance (including vision and dental), retirement benefits, life insurance , shares in the company, paid parental leave, child care, and access to a variety of facilities such as cafeterias and gyms.
The gig economy includes none of these benefits. Plus, a wage for a gig worker “can vary drastically, and by no means has a fixed minimum. For many, the ‘feast or famine ’ style of income can be difficult and stressful; this fluctuation in earnings can make it difficult to save for the future, which is exacerbated further by not being entitled to some form of a retirement package or pension contribution. Then there is the formidable issue of no sick leave—if gig workers are unable to work, they simply do not earn,” explained journalist Elizabeth Matsangou. [10]
While 74.3 percent of gig workers in the U.S. had health insurance in July 2023, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, only 19.9 percent had health insurance provided by their employer, which means that not only are gig workers paying for their entire health insurance premium (which is generally higher than employer plans) but they also have to navigate signing up and renewing their policies every year without the assistance and expertise of a formal human resources department. [10] [20]
Gig workers also face the daunting task of taxes. In the United States, contract workers pay taxes every quarter (so, four times a year compared with once for traditional employees), and they must estimate what they think they will owe the Internal Revenue Service since their yearly incomes are unstable. Gig workers also have to pay both the employer and employee Social Security and Medicare contributions (15.3 percent of their net income). [8] [10] [21]
Con 3: The gig economy is built on worker exploitation.
“Because workplace laws protect employees and not independent contractors, gig companies like Uber and Lyft save a bucket of money on both wages and taxes by avoiding the obligations that every other employer must follow: wage-related laws as well as unemployment, Social Security and Medicare taxes. As a result, gig workers can find themselves paid sub- minimum wages , for example, or left without workers’ compensation when injured or killed on the job,” explained Terri Gerstein, director of the Wagner Labor Initiative at New York University. “Another consequence is that law-abiding employers face unfair competition with businesses that don’t follow the rules, and critical safety-net programs like unemployment insurance lose badly needed funds.” [22]
In 2023 gig workers with full-time jobs earned an average of $838 per week, compared with ”workers with traditional arrangements,” who earned about $1,132. [20]
For younger generations, the “gig is up,” so to speak, on the gig economy because of this exploitation. As explained by Oli Mould, professor in human geography at the University of London, for Generation Z, “the modern ‘hustle’—a culture of relentless job-hopping for small marginal gains—has been exposed as a scam.… [And] this generation is navigating a workplace of reducing benefits, pay and stability….So now they are opting out. Instead of bouncing from job to job in search of some mythical dream placement, they’re keen to stay put, choosing stability over chaos, community over churn.” [23]
Generation Z is increasingly looking to stay with an employer (not an app) for seven or more years, mimicking the experiences of those in Generation X or older, rather than settling for the millennial hustle of the gig economy.
