

Pro 1: The gig economy offers job flexibility.
Many younger workers are not interested in the traditional “nine-to-five” job. They question why they need to commute to an office when they have the Internet at home. The monotonous day-to-day of office work does not suit them and can lead to job dissatisfaction. Gig work allows for flexibility in hours worked and the kind of work pursued, giving gig workers a fair amount of freedom. [10]

Plus, Americans with traditional jobs “are working an average of 47 hours a week—there’s no 40-hour working week anymore. And now, with the advent of technology, managers expect their employees to answer emails and phone calls after work hours, with no additional pay, so employees are burning out and leaving their companies,” said Dan Schawbel, founder of Millennial Branding. Gig workers, however, are working an average of 36 hours, which is more in line with the traditional expectation of 40 hours and which allows for a better work-life balance. [11] [25]

Because gig workers can often set their own hours, they can fit work around classes, child care, doctor’s appointments, various necessities such as grocery shopping, and even emergencies.

Furthermore, the gig economy allows for flexibility in the types of jobs a person can pursue. As the Center for Research in Education and Development Pakistan explained, “The gig economy has made the job market more open. Young workers, no matter where they come from or their level of formal education, can use their skills to find work. Platforms offering such work prioritize merit over traditional credentials, promoting a shift towards a more inclusive society where talent triumphs. This inclusivity extends beyond conventional workplace norms, allowing individuals from diverse backgrounds to showcase their capabilities and contribute meaningfully to the workforce.” [12]

Pro 2: The gig economy provides extra income.
As Encyclopædia Britannica Money noted, “We could all use a little extra cash in our pockets every now and then. And if you’re living paycheck-to-paycheck, you’re not only giving yourself little to no margin for error (or emergency), but you may also be shortchanging your retirement and other financial goals. One way to give a boost to your monthly budget is to pick up some side-hustle income in your free time.” [13]

Joining the gig economy can not only relieve some or all of the stress of living without a financial cushion, but it can also provide quick money for anything from a medical emergency to a vacation, so you don’t have to dip into savings or retirement funds. Gig work can also fill in when too few hours are available for working a primary job in a downturn or a seasonal slump, as is common, for example, in the construction industry.

While kids and teens have been in the gig economy for eons via babysitting and mowing lawns, the new gig economy offers these younger workers an organized platform (rather than knocking on neighbors’ doors) and more fruitful options, from dog walking and tutoring to programming, website design, and social media management. Kids and teens can work toward purchasing their own sports equipment, gaming consoles, beauty hauls, or saving for college, providing them with entrepreneurial work experience and a financial education not generally provided by schools. They learn self-management skills and experience the pride of earning on their own. [14]

“And who knows? Today’s side hustle may be tomorrow’s full-time career or successful start-up. Influencers, hoteliers, franchisees, transportation magnates—many started out as side businesses,” stated Encyclopædia Britannica Money. Kids and adults alike gain valuable experience, maybe finding their life’s calling (or sampling professions that they thought they’d like but do not in the end), all while earning money in the process. [13]

Pro 3: The gig economy provides society with immediate access to specialized workers.
“Alternative work arrangements enable businesses, especially small ones, to access specialized skills like software development, search engine optimization, and translation that they do not need or cannot afford on an ongoing basis. In the absence of a healthy market for independent work, these businesses may have to hire full-time employees who may not be fully utilized or may have to forgo benefitting from these services,” said Paul Oyer, professor of economics at Stanford University. [15]

With businesses now moving at the speed of the global Internet, they need to find workers who can solve problems quickly and efficiently. But, for the benefit of the employer and worker alike, in the gig economy these specialists are able to move on to their next job without the stress of a traditional job hunt and elaborate onboarding with a new employer. [11]

Plus, this new class of workers welcomes this arrangement: “The old leadership was about command and control,” explained Dan Schawbel, founder of Millennial Branding. “Boomer leaders are autocratic leaders, whereas my generation is all about transformational leadership—having a vision, meaningful work, encouraging the best in others, collaborating as a team.” [11]

For example, a company may hire a graphic designer as a gig worker to create a new branding package. This arrangement saves the company from hiring a graphic designer for whom they have no full-time work, while allowing the temp designer an enriching experience creating and working for a variety of clients. The company may also be able to pay the graphic designer a higher fee for the branding package because they are not paying a full-time, year-round employee. [16]
