Hurricane Melissa is now the strongest storm on the planet this year
Sana Noor Haq
By CNN meteorologists Mary Gilbert, Chris Dolce, Briana Waxman and CNN's Sana Noor Haq, Billy Stockwell and Zoe Sottile
Updated 7:58 PM EDT, Mon October 27, 2025
What Jamaica will face as Category 5 hurricane makes landfall
01:53
What we're covering
• Strongest storm this year: Melissa underwent extreme rapid intensification over the weekend and continues to strengthen. The rare Category 5 has winds of 175 mph, with stronger gusts, making it the strongest storm on the planet this year.
• Jamaica’s worst hurricane: Melissa’s outer bands are lashing Jamaica with wind and rain. Mandatory evacuation orders have been issued for vulnerable coastal areas of Jamaica. Melissa has already killed three people in Haiti and one person in the Dominican Republic.
• Catastrophic impact: Up to 40 inches of rain, 13 feet of storm surge and 160 mph sustained winds will cause “extensive infrastructure damage” that will cut off communities, the National Hurricane Center warned.
2 min ago
Hurricane Melissa: A timeline of weather impacts
From CNN Meteorologist Taylor Ward
Hurricane Melissa is slowly turning north and is expected to make landfall in western Jamaica Tuesday morning. After crossing Jamaica, Melissa will make a second landfall in Cuba Tuesday night into early Wednesday morning. Here is what to expect in a few key locations:
Kingston, Jamaica
Worst conditions: Tuesday 5 am to 5 pm ET
Peak wind gusts: 60 to 75 mph
Total rainfall: 12 to 20 inches (October average 6.97 inches)
Montego Bay, Jamaica
Worst conditions: Tuesday 8 am to 6 pm ET
Peak wind gusts: 120 to 140 mph
Total rainfall: 16 to 24 inches (October average 6.54 inches)
Worst storm surge will be Tuesday mid to late afternoon after the center of the storm passes
Santiago de Cuba, Cuba
Worst conditions: Tuesday 10 pm to Wednesday 7 am ET
Peak wind gusts: 100 to 120 mph
Total rainfall: 12 to 20 inches (October average 7.60 inches)
1 hr 44 min ago
"Leave now” or shelter in place. US embassies across Caribbean warn citizens of approaching hurricane
From CNN's Billy Stockwell
Waves crash onto the beach in Kingston, Jamaica on Monday.
Waves crash onto the beach in Kingston, Jamaica on Monday.
Ricardo Makyn/AFP/Getty Images
US embassies across the Caribbean issued advice for US citizens on Monday as Hurricane Melissa barreled toward Jamaica.
Here is a summary of their guidance:
The US Embassy in Jamaica told US citizens potentially in the path of Hurricane Melissa to be prepared to shelter in place, adding that the embassy will still be available for “limited emergency services” until Friday.
The US Embassy in The Bahamas said US citizens who could be in Melissa’s track should consider departing now “while flights are available and departure is still possible” or be prepared to shelter in place.
The US Embassy in Haiti warned that any travel is conducted “at your own risk,” but ultimately issued similar advice for US citizens in risky areas: “Leave now while some flights are still available or be prepared to shelter in place.”
The US Embassy in Cuba said that it couldn’t guarantee the safety of US citizens traveling to airports, borders or during onward travel. It also suggested US citizens either “leave now” or be prepared to take shelter.
“Factor Cuba’s lack of health and emergency infrastructure, including an unreliable power grid, in your preparations,” it added.
ADVERTISEMENT
2 hr 28 min ago
Why late-season hurricanes favor the Caribbean
CNN's Tyler Ory
Hurricane season is winding down across most of the Atlantic, but in the Caribbean it’s normal for storms like Melissa to form in late October or November.
As the rest of the Atlantic cools, the Caribbean stays warm. Its waters hold heat well into autumn, providing the energy hurricanes need to form and strengthen.
At the same time, stronger winds high in the atmosphere — part of the jet stream — shift southward as the seasons change. Those fast winds create disruptive wind shear that tears potential storms apart across the open Atlantic, but the Caribbean often remains a pocket of calmer air farther south.
That lingering warmth and calmer atmosphere make the Caribbean one of the few places where hurricanes can still form late in the year — even after much of the Atlantic has gone quiet. Atlantic hurricane season officially ends on November 30.
2 hr 20 min ago
Melissa will drench much of the northern Caribbean next
From CNN Meteorologist Briana Waxman
Once Melissa moves past Jamaica, the storm’s flood threat will spread across the northern Caribbean through midweek.
Much of southern Cuba will see at least a foot of rain with locally higher amounts of 20 to 30 inches.
Parts of the central and southeastern Bahamas should see 4 to 8 inches as Melissa tracks north by midweek, with localized totals of 12 inches.
Rain will continue in Southern Haiti and the Dominican Republic too, with an additional 6 to 8 inches possible early this week. That’s on top of the torrential rain that’s fallen in the past few days.
Much of the northern Caribbean will face widespread flooding, impassable roads and a significant landslide risk through at least Wednesday.
Even as Melissa weakens slightly over land, its rainfall footprint will expand, so places far from the center could still experience significant flooding.
AL STORM1 TROP RAIN ACCUM GIZ.png
CNN Weather
ADVERTISEMENT
2 hr 52 min ago
Melissa’s track shifts slightly and new warnings are issued
From CNN Meteorologist Mary Gilbert
Melissa remains a Category 5 hurricane with winds of 175 mph as of 5 p.m. ET but could potentially strengthen further in the coming hours, according to the National Hurricane Center.
The hurricane has jogged a bit west of its forecast track in the past few hours, so its predicted landfall point in Jamaica has shifted slightly, too. Landfall is now expected near Black River, in the southwestern portion of the island, sometime after sunrise Tuesday morning.
Melissa is still likely to be a ferocious Category 5 hurricane at landfall, though minor fluctuations in its top wind speed until that point are possible.
Beyond Jamaica, Melissa is still forecast to slam Cuba as a major hurricane late Tuesday night or early Wednesday morning. From there, it will impact portions of the Bahamas and surrounding areas.
A hurricane warning is now in effect for the southeastern and central Bahamas while a tropical storm warning is in effect for the Turks and Caicos Islands. These warnings indicate powerful wind gusts are likely to start within 36 hours.
2 hr 52 min ago
Which side of the hurricane you're on makes a big difference to safety
CNN's Tyler Ory
Hurricane Melissa spins in the Caribbean Sea on Monday afternoon.
Hurricane Melissa spins in the Caribbean Sea on Monday afternoon.
NOAA/NESDIS/GOES-19
Melissa is expected to make landfall along Jamaica’s southern coast Tuesday morning, but the highest risk from dangerous winds will be focused on the area northeast the storm’s center — which unfortunately means most of the island.
The problem stems from how a hurricane spins as it moves: Winds rotate counterclockwise while the whole storm moves forward. On the right-hand side of the storm, the forward motion adds to its swirling winds, creating stronger gusts and a higher risk of destructive storm surge. On the left-hand side, these forces start to oppose and partially cancel each other out.
For Jamaica, that means areas east of where Melissa’s center crosses the coast could face the most extreme wind damage and coastal flooding. Western parts of the island may see slightly less wind but still endure dangerous rainfall and flash flooding as Melissa’s rain sweeps through.
ADVERTISEMENT
2 hr 32 min ago
Jamaican PM worries infrastructure in parts of the country won't withstand Melissa
From CNN's Billy Stockwell
Jamaican PM worries infrastructure in parts of the country can't withstand Melissa
00:45
Jamaica’s Prime Minister Andrew Holness said Monday that he is concerned about whether infrastructure in some parts of the country will be able to withstand the force of Hurricane Melissa, which is barrelling toward the Caribbean island.
“It’s been sitting on the south coast of Jamaica for a few days now and it is likely to turn north,” Holness told CNN’s Derek Van Dam from the capital Kingston. “So that means it could have an impact on our shores, more to the western end of Jamaica.”
Holness said that he doesn’t believe there is “any infrastructure within this region that could withstand a Category 5 storm, so there could be significant dislocation.”
Addressing the people of Jamaica, Holness said: “I urge all Jamaicans and people who are friendly well-wishers of Jamaica, to continue to pray that this hurricane does not hit us directly.”
1 hr 7 min ago
"It does not look safe," Jamaicans prepare for the country's worst hurricane
From CNN's Hira Humayun
Jamaicans prepare for Hurricane Melissa
00:34
Jamaicans across the island are bracing for the worst hurricane the country has seen.
In Montego Bay, Glendevon Primary school is being turned into a shelter.
Shelter manager Sandra Simon Clarke and her team have laid mats across desks and the floors, turning classrooms into makeshift bedrooms.
“I have seen and heard that it is going to be catastrophic,” Clarke told Reuters. “So we are expecting that persons will come to the shelter, so we are ready, so please don’t be afraid,” she said, stressing that those coming to the shelter should bring essentials like medications, some food items, and diapers for young children.
In Kingston, Reuters video shows gas station attendants preparing gas tanks, shielding and securing the pump with plastic covering as winds continue to blow.
RUBiS Jamaica worker Craig Brown wraps a gas pump as Hurricane Melissa approaches in Kingston, Jamaica, on Monday.
RUBiS Jamaica worker Craig Brown wraps a gas pump as Hurricane Melissa approaches in Kingston, Jamaica, on Monday.
Octavio Jones/Reuters
In coastal Harbour View, Susan Brown is among the residents watching the ocean waves ahead of the hurricane making landfall.
“Down here does not look safe. It doesn’t look safe,” Brown says. “Because people that live down here - when you look at the waves, you can see it coming up. It is not turning back. It’s coming straight ahead.”
Robert, whose house is right on the ocean, is worried about the wind and storm surge. He’s put sandbags by the door of his home to try to keep it secure as he heads further inland into Kingston. Some residents who live near Robert are staying in place and waiting out the storm, worried they may not be able to return home if they evacuate and the coastal highway sustains damage.
“For me, I’d rather stay away,” says Robert.
ADVERTISEMENT
3 hr 18 min ago
What to expect in Cuba
From CNN Meteorologist Mary Gilbert
Yorkis Torres and his mother-in-law Nancy Soler leave their home to take temporary shelter ahead of the arrival of Hurricane Melissa in Havana, Cuba, on Monday.
Yorkis Torres and his mother-in-law Nancy Soler leave their home to take temporary shelter ahead of the arrival of Hurricane Melissa in Havana, Cuba, on Monday.
Norlys Perez/Reuters
Cuba will take a direct hit from Melissa, likely while it is still a powerful major hurricane — defined as Category 3 or higher. Landfall is expected late Tuesday night or very early Wednesday morning, but rain and wind will begin before that.
Some of Melissa’s outermost rain bands are already stretching into southern Cuba Monday. Tropical storm-force winds will hit the country’s southern coast starting Tuesday morning, with hurricane-force winds arriving by the evening at the latest.
Flooding rainfall: Parts of southern Cuba could see 20 to 30 inches of rain this week — more than enough to trigger life-threatening flash flooding and mudslides.
Destructive winds: Melissa will likely have sustained winds of around 120 mph near its center at landfall with higher gusts. Damage to buildings, trees and power lines is likely.
Storm surge: Melissa’s winds will generate up to 11 feet of storm surge for southern Cuba, especially late Tuesday into Wednesday.
3 hr 28 min ago
Tens of thousands of people evacuate eastern Cuba ahead of Melissa's arrival
From CNN's Patrick Oppmann
A man covers the windows of his home with corrugated iron ahead of the arrival of Hurricane Melissa in Santiago de Cuba, Cuba, on Monday.
A man covers the windows of his home with corrugated iron ahead of the arrival of Hurricane Melissa in Santiago de Cuba, Cuba, on Monday.
AFP/Getty Images
Tens of thousands of people have been evacuated in eastern Cuba ahead of Hurricane Melissa’s punishing wrath, according to Cuban state-run media website Cubadebate.
In Santiago de Cuba — the island’s second largest city — more than 119,000 people were evacuated, Cubadebate reported, quoting local officials. Many of those were told by Civil Defense authorities to leave their homes in low-lying areas prone to flooding.
All public transport in eastern Cuba has been suspended, including rail services, buses and flights, state-run TV reported, citing a government announcement.
Ahead of the storm, a CNN team in Santiago de Cuba saw large crowds lining up to buy food and water or take out cash from ATMs. Many Cubans climbed across roofs in the city to remove metal awnings and water tanks that Melissa’s raging winds could turn into deadly shrapnel.
The powerful and slow moving hurricane could be the most dangerous Cubans have seen in years. Melissa is still expected to be a major hurricane when it reaches eastern Cuba after hitting Jamaica.
“In the meeting of the National Defense Council, we insisted that the priority is to protect the population,” Cuban President Miguel Diaz-Canel posted on X.
Damage and heavy rain from Melissa will likely further compound Cuba’s problems, including dire power shortages, economic instability and an epidemic of the disease dengue, which is carried by mosquitoes.
ADVERTISEMENT
3 hr 27 min ago
Melissa is already impacting Jamaica. Here’s when it will get worse
From CNN Meteorologist Mary Gilbert
People stand along the waterfront in Kingston, Jamaica, on Monday.
People stand along the waterfront in Kingston, Jamaica, on Monday.
Octavio Jones/Reuters
Melissa’s center is only about 150 miles southwest of Kingston, Jamaica, but some of the hurricane’s rain and wind is already hitting the island.
Tropical-storm force winds are blowing over Jamaica, according to the National Hurricane Center. Those wind speeds can range from 39 to 73 mph. The more powerful hurricane-force winds are still just blowing over the ocean, for now.
Those 74 mph or more winds are possible on land starting after midnight. Jamaica’s southern coast will feel these dangerous winds first as they gradually spread over much of the island.
The most destructive winds will arrive when Melissa makes landfall, likely sometime after sunrise on Tuesday. Melissa is likely to lose a small bit of strength before landfall because it’s difficult for a hurricane to remain at its peak power for more than a few hours. Even so, it could have ferocious Category 5 winds of around 160 mph at that time with higher gusts.
Rain is falling in Jamaica, but Melissa’s heaviest downpours will start up later Monday night and continue through Tuesday. This torrential rain will likely cause life-threatening flash flooding and landslides.
4 hr 2 min ago
UN staff to deploy to Cuba, Jamaica this week if conditions allow
From CNN's Billy Stockwell
United Nations staff are preparing to deploy to Cuba and Jamaica this week as the region nervously awaits landfall of Hurricane Melissa.
The UN’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) said Monday that it is planning to send in personnel, “as conditions allow, to reinforce coordination and preparedness efforts across the region.”
“OCHA and its partners are supporting authorities ahead of further impact,” the office said in a statement. After Jamaica, Melissa is still expected to be a major hurricane when it roars over eastern Cuba with damaging winds, storm surge and potentially catastrophic flooding.
“The World Food Programme is providing logistics support, including generators, while UNICEF has pre-positioned water and sanitation supplies, as well as materials for child protection,” OCHA added.
ADVERTISEMENT
4 hr 33 min ago
The US won't feel Melissa's wrath. Here's why
From CNN Meteorologists Chris Dolce and Mary Gilbert
The cold front protecting the US coast and Melissa's forecast path turning away from the East Coast.
The cold front protecting the US coast and Melissa's forecast path turning away from the East Coast.
CNN Weather
A strong cold front tracking into the East will act as an atmospheric brick wall of protection along the US coastline.
Wet and windy conditions from the front will spread into the East Coast Wednesday and Thursday, but that’s a small price to pay for the benefit of shoving Melissa away.
Cold fronts like this are more frequent toward the end of hurricane season, but they don’t always offer protection. Storms that track farther north and west in the Caribbean than Melissa did can sometimes get drawn up by them and sent toward the eastern Gulf Coast, most often Florida.
While Melissa won’t hit the US directly, it will still churn up some rough seas and increase the risk of dangerous rip currents along the East Coast. Those impacts will begin Wednesday when Melissa crosses into the Atlantic, and will continue through at least the weekend.
4 hr 44 min ago
Why Kingston’s airport is in one of the worst places for storm surge
CNN Meteorologist Briana Waxman
An aerial view shows waves crashing into the seawall that protects Palisadoes Strip, the route to Norman Manley International Airport, before the arrival of Hurricane Melissa, in Kingston, Jamaica, on Saturday.
An aerial view shows waves crashing into the seawall that protects Palisadoes Strip, the route to Norman Manley International Airport, before the arrival of Hurricane Melissa, in Kingston, Jamaica, on Saturday.
Ricardo Makyn/AFP/Getty Images
Norman Manley International Airport sits on a thin strip of sand barely above sea level between Kingston Harbour and the open Caribbean Sea. It is exposed on both sides.
When a hurricane like Melissa pushes in from the south, onshore winds drive water straight into the harbour. The surge piles up with nowhere to drain, flooding the runway and nearby roads.
That’s exactly what happened during Hurricane Gilbert in 1988, when waves tore across the airfield.
Both of Jamaica’s international airports — Norman Manley in Kingston and Sangster in Montego Bay — are now closed as Melissa lashes the island.
ADVERTISEMENT
5 hr 13 min ago
Jamaica's mountains could get one-fifth of their yearly rain in just days
From CNN Meteorologist Chris Dolce
Jamaica’s Blue Mountains rise up to 7,500 feet in elevation, and because of that they are extremely wet with an average of up to nearly 200 inches of rain in a year, according to the UK Met Office. Mountains enhance rainfall by forcing air to rise, which causes more water vapor to to cool and condense into clouds and rain.
The maximum rain totals from Melissa could be as much as 40 inches in the nation’s higher elevations. That’s about 20% of what the Blue Mountains average in an entire year, falling over the course of just a few days.
The forecast rainfall totals are still well short of the record for a hurricane or tropical storm in Jamaica. In November 1909, a hurricane dropped an incredible 114 inches of rain at Silver Hill Plantation in the Blue Mountains.
5 hr 25 min ago
Melissa is one of the Atlantic’s strongest hurricanes on record
From CNN Meteorologist Mary Gilbert
Satellite imagery captures Hurricane Melissa on Monday afternoon.
Satellite imagery captures Hurricane Melissa on Monday afternoon.
CSU-CIRA/RAMMB/NOAA
Melissa’s immense power has placed the hurricane in very exclusive company. With sustained winds of 175 mph, Melissa is now one of the strongest hurricanes, based on top wind speeds, on record in the Atlantic basin.
Only nine Atlantic hurricanes have been stronger than Melissa, though several others have also hit 175-mph strength. Hurricane Allen from 1980 still holds the title as the basin’s strongest storm: 190 mph winds.
Melissa is also one of the strongest hurricanes to ever roam the Caribbean Sea, only behind Allen, 2005’s Wilma, 1998’s Mitch and 1988’s Gilbert. Gilbert was the last major hurricane to directly strike Jamaica.
ADVERTISEMENT
4 hr 45 min ago
Evacuation orders in Jamaica are a life-saving "directive," minister says
From CNN's Billy Stockwell
Evacuation orders in Jamaica are a life-saving "directive," minister says
01:08
Jamaica’s Minister of Labour and Social Security Pearnel Charles said Monday that the evacuation orders issued for vulnerable areas are not a suggestion, but a “directive to save your life,” as the country confronts “extreme devastation and danger” posed by Hurricane Melissa.
“It (Melissa) is very slow, it is very, very, very intense. And that means the outcome may potentially be extreme devastation and danger,” Charles told CNN’s Derek Van Dam.
“I want to tell everyone who is listening, who is watching, the evacuation order is not a suggestion, it is a directive, and a directive to save your life,” he added.
The minister also said that buses are being used to transport people in need to emergency shelters across the country. “If you are in a low-lying, flood-prone area, now is the time to take no chances and not to gamble,” he said.
5 hr 4 min ago
NOAA hurricane hunters flying into Hurricane Melissa without pay
From CNN's Andrew Freedman
Inside the eye of Hurricane Melissa
00:14
The crews on board NOAA’s hurricane hunter aircraft and the ground crews that support them are flying missions into Hurricane Melissa without pay during the government shutdown, according to a NOAA official who spoke to CNN on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak to the press.
The crews have been encountering extraordinary turbulence in this particular storm. One flight Monday morning was forced to end its mission early in order to make sure the plane had not sustained structural damage.
Meteorologist Andy Hazelton was aboard that particular flight and described the experience to CNN. The plane hit severe turbulence while flying through the southwest portion of the eye wall, where the fiercest winds and heaviest rains are typically located. “You hit a big enough updraft and a big enough downdraft, then you have to make sure the plane is ok,” Hazelton said.
Hazelton has been flying these missions since 2018 and said Hurricane Melissa was “The most turbulent hurricane I’ve ever been in.”
ADVERTISEMENT
6 hr 5 min ago
Melissa is now Earth's strongest storm of 2025
From CNN Meteorologist Chris Dolce
Melissa continues to strengthen and is now the strongest storm to roam Earth in 2025.
Its maximum sustained winds are 175 mph with stronger gusts as of 2 p.m ET, according to the National Hurricane Center. That’s a 10 mph increase in winds from the 11 a.m. ET advisory.
The Category 5 hurricane’s center is 145 miles southwest of Kingston, Jamaica, as of 11 a.m. ET. Melissa has started to turn north toward Jamaica and is now tracking west-northwest at 3 mph.
6 hr 12 min ago
Melissa's most extreme winds will hit higher elevations the hardest
From CNN's Tyler Ory
A hurricane’s wind speed is measured from the ground, but the most powerful winds often roar several hundred — or even a thousand — feet above. That’s because friction from trees, buildings and natural terrain slows the air near the surface, while the atmosphere above remains unobstructed.
NOAA aircraft flying through Melissa recorded winds of 220 mph just a few thousand feet above the ground. Meanwhile, ground-level wind speeds were measured at 160 mph.
That difference matters in higher-elevation communities like Mandeville, about 2,060 feet above sea level and home to roughly 50,000 people. Winds there could be up to 60 mph stronger than along the coast — a gap that could bring exponentially greater damage risk.
“Catastrophic winds in the eyewall have the potential to cause total structural failure especially in higher elevation areas tonight and early Tuesday,” according to a NOAA advisory.
